WEEK 4: GIT COMMANDS INSIDE RSTUDIO
POLS 4130 | September 22 and 24, 2026

Read Week4_Git_Workshop.md alongside this reference.
Open Tools > Terminal > New Terminal in RStudio.
Copy ONE relevant command at a time and press Enter.
Replace example names, emails, paths, and URLs first.
Do not Source this file, use R's Run button, or execute the whole file.

0A. CHECK INSTALLATION
---------------------
git --version

Expected: a Git version number.
If missing: follow the guide's Windows or macOS installation instructions.
Then Tools > Global Options > Git/SVN should find the installed executable.
On Windows, RStudio's Terminal settings can select Git Bash after installation.
On macOS only, if developer tools are missing:
xcode-select --install

0B. CONFIGURE IDENTITY ONCE PER COMPUTER
--------------------------------------
Replace the quoted examples with your own name and GitHub-associated email.
The exact GitHub no-reply address from Settings > Emails is also suitable.

git config --global user.name "Stephanie Pacheco"
git config --global user.email "spachec7@lion.lmu.edu"
git config --global init.defaultBranch main

Read the effective settings:
git config --get user.name
git config --get user.email
git config --get init.defaultBranch

Expected: your chosen name, email, and main. No output while setting a value
is normal. --global applies to this computer; repository settings can override
it. Commit identity is separate from GitHub authentication.
The guide includes an equivalent usethis option for the R Console.

1A. EXISTING LOCAL FOLDER: INITIALIZE, COMMIT, THEN PUSH
-----------------------------------------------------
First open this intended folder as an RStudio Project:
File > New Project > Existing Directory.
In a NEW Terminal for this project, verify the location:
pwd

If pwd is not recognized in Windows Command Prompt, use cd with no arguments
to display the current folder. Git Bash and macOS shells support pwd.
The printed folder must be your practice project, not the course download,
your home folder, or another repository. If a Terminal is in the wrong folder,
open a new one from the intended project or use cd with your actual full path.

Preferred initialization:
Tools > Project Options > Git/SVN > Git, confirm, and restart the project.
Alternative for a folder that is NOT already a repository (Git 2.28+):
git init -b main

Use ONE initialization method. Reopen the .Rproj after the Terminal method.
Check the repository root and status:
git rev-parse --show-toplevel
git status

Run the baseline R analysis, review .gitignore, then use the Git pane to stage
only the project files and Commit: Add baseline R analysis.
A .git folder alone does not mean a commit exists.
Verify the commit and branch:
git log -1 --oneline
git branch --show-current

If this newly initialized practice branch is master, rename it to main.
Skip when the branch is already main:
git branch -m main

On GitHub, create your EMPTY css-rstudio-practice repository.
Do not add a README, .gitignore, license, or template on GitHub for this route.
Check whether a remote already exists:
git remote -v

If no remote is listed, add YOUR repository's HTTPS URL:
git remote add origin https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/css-rstudio-practice.git

Verify the URL before uploading anything:
git remote -v

Expected: origin's fetch and push URLs belong to your account and practice repo.
If origin already exists, inspect it. Skip adding it if it is already correct.
Ask for help before replacing an existing connection.

After the local first commit and GitHub authentication are ready:
git push -u origin main

Expected: main uploads and tracks origin/main. Refresh GitHub and check the
baseline commit and files. Return to RStudio's Git pane for normal Push/Pull.
-u sets the tracking relationship; adding origin alone does not upload work.
Do not force Push to repair an error. Read the guide's troubleshooting table.

1B. NEW GITHUB REPOSITORY FIRST: RSTUDIO CLONE DIALOG
-------------------------------------------------
Alternative to 1A: create a GitHub repo WITH a README, copy Code > HTTPS,
then File > New Project > Version Control > Git. Paste your URL and choose a
local parent folder. Copy starter-project contents into the clone, including
.gitignore, keep its .Rproj, and follow the baseline analysis/commit steps.
A clone already has Git history and origin; do not run git init or add origin.

1C. FORK AN EXISTING REPOSITORY, THEN CLONE YOUR FORK
---------------------------------------------------
Open in a browser:
https://github.com/ShuyuanShen/quarto-academic-website-template

Click Fork, choose your own account as Owner, and Create fork.
On YOUR fork, copy Code > HTTPS. Clone using RStudio's New Project >
Version Control > Git dialog. Use a separate folder from the R analysis.

Alternative to the dialog: in a Terminal in your chosen PARENT folder,
replace YOUR-FORK-URL with the full HTTPS URL, then run:
git clone YOUR-FORK-URL

Open the .Rproj inside the new clone. If a repository has none, use
File > New Project > Existing Directory in the cloned folder.
Use ONE clone method. Do not initialize a new Git repository inside the clone.

In the website project's RStudio Terminal, verify:
git remote -v
git branch --show-current
git status

Expected: origin names YOUR fork, the branch is main, and the files are local.
Edit the first heading of README.md, Save, Diff, stage, Commit, and Push using
the Git pane. Refresh YOUR fork to verify the commit. This does not alter the
instructor's repository or publish a live website. Return to the analysis
project's .Rproj before continuing the visualization lab.

AUTHENTICATION (R CONSOLE, NOT TERMINAL)
--------------------------------------
Use a working credential manager's browser sign-in when prompted.
If a token is needed, follow the guide's selected-repository permission steps.
Install gitcreds using Packages > Install, then in the R CONSOLE run:
gitcreds::gitcreds_set()

Enter the token only at its interactive prompt, never into a code file.
A normal GitHub password does not authenticate HTTPS Git pushes.

Sources and screenshot credits: Week4_Git_Workshop.md.
